# Cleaned Text - boilerplate_remover

*Generated on: 2024-12-22 09:16:14*

## Content

Established in 2003, Malaria Consortium is one of the world’s leading non-profit organisations specialising in the prevention, control, and treatment of malaria and other communicable diseases among vulnerable populations. Our mission is to improve lives in Africa and Asia through sustainable, evidence-based programmes that combat targeted diseases and promote child and maternal health.

UK Registered Charity No: 1099776  
Company Number: 4785712  
Trustees’ Report and Financial Statements  
For the Year to 31 March 2020

Malaria Consortium  
Trustees’ Report and Financial Statements  
For the Year to 31 March 2020

Reference and Administrative Details  
Status: Malaria Consortium is a registered charity and is incorporated under the Companies Act as a company limited by guarantee not having a share capital. The company is governed by its Memorandum and Articles of Association dated 3 June 2003, under which each member has undertaken to contribute to the assets in the event of a winding-up a sum not exceeding £1.

Company Number: 4785712  
Charity Number: 1099776  
Registered Office: The Green House, 244-254 Cambridge Heath Road, London E2 9DA, UK  
Malaria Consortium, during this period, also had offices in Uganda, Burkina Faso, Chad, Ethiopia, Mozambique, South Sudan, Nigeria, Thailand, Cambodia, and Myanmar.

Patron: The Right Reverend Dinis S Sengulane, Retired Anglican Bishop, Mozambique

The Trustees: The Trustees, who are also Directors under company law, who served during the year and up to the date of this report were as follows:  
(CHAIR) Professor Marcel Tanner  
(TREASURER) Canisius Anthony  
Anthony Davy (Resigned 7th November 2019)  
Dr Allan Schapira  
Dr Neil Squires  
Dr Nermeen Varawalla (Resigned 14th November 2019)  
Dr Precious Lunga  
Dr Simon Kay  
Mark Clark  
Peter Potter-Lesage (Resigned 5th March 2020)  
Sarah Veilex  
The Rt. Hon. Baroness Sheehan  
Professor Jayne Webster  
Dr Jane Achan (Resigned 29th January 2020)  
Dr Linus Igwemezie (appointed 5th March 2020)  
Ian Boulton (appointed 5th March 2020)

Chief Executive: Charles Nelson

Bankers: HSBC Bank PLC, Westminster Branch, 22 Victoria Street, London SW1H ONJ, United Kingdom

Auditor: KPMG LLP, Chartered Accountants, 15 Canada Square, London, E14 5GL, United Kingdom

Report of the Trustees: The Trustees present their report and the audited financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2020. The Trustees’ Report also contains the information required in a Strategic Report as set out on pages 6 to 13. Reference and administrative information set out on page 1 forms part of this report. The financial statements comply with the current statutory requirements, the Memorandum and Articles of Association, and the Statement of Recommended Practice (2015) - Accounting and Reporting by Charities. A copy of the Trustees’ Report and financial statements can be obtained by writing to the organisation at the registered address as detailed on page 1 of this report.

Structure, Governance and Management: Malaria Consortium is a charitable company, governed by a Board of Trustees [minimum 3 - maximum 18] under the Articles of Association. The Board meets quarterly, and for the Annual General Meeting (AGM) in July, where the audited accounts are normally approved. Also, at the AGM one third of the trustees retire, and are eligible for re-election as long as they have not served for a continuous period exceeding six years. After six years, trustees must retire. There are three sub-committees of the Board: The Governance Committee to review and make recommendations regarding Board effectiveness, and ongoing Board development and lead the process of Board renewal. Currently, the Committee comprises four trustees, the Chief Executive (non-voting). The Finance, Audit and Risk Committee (FARC) to provide assurance to the Board that an effective internal control and risk management system is maintained and that financial performance is being effectively managed. Currently, the Committee comprises four trustees, one non-trustee member, and the Chief Executive and Finance Director (non-voting). The Compensation & HR Committee (C&HR) to review and make recommendations on the Chief Executive’s remuneration, the framework for the Global Management Group’s remuneration and the organisation’s human resources strategy and policies. Currently, the Committee comprises a minimum of three trustee members, including the Chair of the Board of Trustees.

Meetings and attendance for the financial year are shown in the table below:  
Meeting Number of meetings # trustees in attendance (average)  
Annual General Meeting 1 14  
Board Meeting 4 12  
Governance Committee 4 3  
FARC 4 4  
C&HR 2 4

New trustees are recruited for their skills in areas relevant to the governance, aims, or the changing nature of strategy and activities of Malaria Consortium. They are recruited in a variety of ways including public advertisement, and/or by recommendation from those working for or with Malaria Consortium, or from existing trustees. Candidates are scrutinised by the Governance Committee and by the Board as a whole. All new trustees receive an induction to the organisation by the Chief Executive and may be invited to attend a Board Meeting prior to election.

The Board of Trustees approves the major strategic decisions for the organisation. Each year, a number of trustees are invited to make field visits to be fully informed about Malaria Consortium’s activities, thus enabling them to effectively support these strategic decisions. The Board of Trustees delegates the day-to-day operational decision-making to the Chief Executive, who, with the Global Management Group (GMG), runs the organisation and signs all contracts. The GMG is supported by Senior Management Teams at regional and country level who are responsible for all aspects of our programmes.

Malaria Consortium inducts new staff to enable a strong understanding of the organisation covering structure, policies, and procedures along with expected conduct and other role-relevant information. Core policies that are fundamental to Malaria Consortium’s work and which staff are required to read fully are: the Code of Conduct; the Safeguarding Policy; the Anti-Fraud and Anti-Corruption Policy; the Anti-Money Laundering Policy; the Conflict of Interest Policy; the Whistle Blowing Policy; and the Anti-Bribery Policy. Managers are also introduced to people management policies, procedures, budgeting, and planning.

Malaria Consortium utilises annual performance and development reviews to enable managers and staff to identify learning initiatives to bridge skills and/or knowledge gaps.

Malaria Consortium’s head office is in London, United Kingdom, with regional offices for East and Southern Africa in Kampala, Uganda covering Uganda, Mozambique, South Sudan, and Ethiopia; for West Africa in Abuja, Nigeria covering Nigeria, Chad, and Burkina Faso; and for Asia in Phnom Penh, Cambodia covering Cambodia, Thailand, Myanmar, and Bangladesh. Regional offices coordinate and supervise programmes and projects at country level in the three regions. Global activities and any work in other parts of the world are directed through the head office in the UK. For more detail on our programmes and offices, please refer to our website www.malariaconsortium.org.

At a country level, we work with Ministries of Health (MOH), local and regional UN offices, regional organisations in West, East, and Southern Africa, National Malaria Control Programmes (NMCP), bilateral donors, international foundations, civil society organisations, development projects, private sector, and most importantly, communities suffering from malaria, other communicable diseases, and malnutrition. Close collaborations are maintained with academic institutions. In the UK including the Nuffield Centre for International Health and Development at The University of Leeds, the London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, Imperial College, and University College London. Internationally, we collaborate with Karolinska Institute, Institute Pasteur, University of Oslo, Mahidol University (Bangkok, Thailand), University of Nigeria, University of Pretoria, and Makerere University (Uganda).

Malaria Consortium’s income is predominantly restricted. About half our income is raised through project-based contract and grant applications. Income on these projects is recorded at the same time as expense is incurred. Over recent years, we have seen increased funding from philanthropists and individuals around the world who support charities that have achieved GiveWell Top Charity status. For us, this is mainly, though not exclusively, linked to closing gaps in coverage for seasonal malaria chemoprevention (SMC) across the Sahel, maintaining and further developing life-saving interventions for children under the age of five, and in broadening our funding base. However, it also has significant impact on the way our numbers are reported. Because of the seasonal nature of our activity, with expenditure concentrated in July to November (the rainy season), regular observers will notice a further rise in our restricted reserves. These commitments from our donors, plus increased income from interest, are allowing us to plan for both continuities in existing areas for the following two years, and expansion to cover further eligible children.

Mission and Objectives: The mission of Malaria Consortium is to improve lives in Africa and Asia through sustainable, evidence-based programmes that combat targeted diseases and promote child and maternal health. We have referred to the guidance in the Charity Commission’s guidance on Public Benefit when reviewing our aims and objectives and in planning our future activities. In particular, the trustees consider how these activities will contribute to the aims and the objectives of the charity, as shown below, that guide all our work serving those suffering from communicable diseases and malnutrition in Africa and Asia.

Objectives: We end this reporting year at the end of a five-year strategy 2015-2019. This strategy was based on four key business areas and five strategic objectives. The four key business areas are: a) Preventive Treatment: looking at intervention through prophylaxis, mass drug administration, and existing and emerging vaccines. b) Vector Control: looking both at interventions to reduce the number of vectors present in the community and at those that keep people away from vectors. c) Case management: covering both diagnosis and treatment, improving both access to and the quality of services available should an individual present with symptoms. d) Health Service Effectiveness and Efficiency: recognising that there are many diverse elements to health system strengthening, we focus on the key interventions that deliver the functionality and data necessary for effective decision-making and responses to health needs.

We recognise that these business areas are not always found in isolation and the five strategic objectives aim to reflect this. Our first objective covers our overarching work to put in place the policies, mechanisms, and resources necessary, at a national and international level, to ensure that appropriate interventions are not hindered by lack of support at a political level. The remaining four objectives are directly linked to each of the business areas. We measure the progress of our strategy against these objectives.

The objectives are: 1. To guide international and national policies and strategies to enhance control and accelerate elimination of targeted diseases and malnutrition. 2. To reach at least 10 million people (in the strategy period) with preventive treatment, supporting the appropriate uptake of emerging vaccines and drug-based prevention approaches. 3. To engage in at-scale delivery of effective vector control interventions and develop, investigate, promote, and implement novel, vector-focused approaches that reduce targeted disease transmission. 4. To improve access to, and the quality of services for, the diagnosis and treatment of targeted diseases and/or those that enhance child and maternal health. 5. To improve health system effectiveness and efficiency, through enhanced surveillance, outbreak response, referral, reporting, and capacity and market development.

An additional objective of this financial year was to have in place a new five-year strategy for 2020-2024. The preparation work was completed and a strategy was ready for launch. However, the realities of the COVID-19 pandemic happened prior to the launch of that strategy to the organisation, and the Trustees concluded that it was sensible to hold the formal launch of a new strategy until 2021, and focus for 2020/21 on supporting our host governments on maintaining/adapting existing programmes and research, while accommodating the public health necessities of the pandemic.

Strategic Report: Achievements and Performance: At an operational level, Malaria Consortium has expanded our programmes to improve access to effective prevention and treatment of malaria, pneumonia, diarrhoea, and dengue to some of the poorest populations in Africa and Asia. A selection of key achievements and challenges for the year, linked to our objectives, is presented below: To guide global and national policies and strategies to enhance control and accelerate elimination of targeted diseases and malnutrition Malaria Consortium, both at international and national level, has maintained a presence in key partnerships and working groups linked to policy and advocacy. Globally these include at the WHO’s Malaria Policy Advisory Committee (MPAC) and Vector Control Working Group and through the Roll Back Malaria Partnership to End Malaria. In Asia, we have hosted the Vector Control and Surveillance working groups of the Asia Pacific Malaria Elimination Network (APMEN). In the UK, we work with the All Party Parliamentary Group for Malaria and Neglected Tropical Diseases and are an active member of the UK Coalition against NTDs. We partner with the Ministries of Health where Malaria Consortium works, and work with local advocacy partners in endemic areas, aiming to change policy and practice. We continue to participate in WHO Technical consultations, that have replaced the Technical Expert Groups.

Through our role in the PMI VectorLink project, we have been supporting a number of countries directly to shape their vector control policies and strategies. We have supported Malawi and Kenya to develop their national integrated vector control strategies and insecticide resistance management plans, to guide evidence-based selection of appropriate interventions that are tailored to local epidemiological settings. We are currently supporting Burkina Faso and Ethiopia to develop their insecticide resistance management plans.

In Nigeria, we are the chosen partner for the UK’s Department for International Development (DfID) for the implementation of the Support to the National Malaria Programme (SuNMaP2), working alongside the government to develop sustainable public and private sector interventions in six states.

With the arrival of COVID-19, Malaria Consortium has been central to the development of guidelines for safely continuing key interventions against other infectious diseases, especially malaria, including guidance documents on how to implement SMC safely in the context of COVID-19 and on interpreting routine malaria data through the Monitoring and Evaluation Reference Group [MERG]. We are engaged in modification of iCCM guidelines at global and at country level - particularly Uganda and Mozambique.

To reach at least 10 million people (in the strategy period) with preventive treatment, supporting the appropriate uptake of emerging vaccines and drug-based prevention approaches The primary intervention contributing to this objective continues to be seasonal malaria chemoprevention (SMC) for children of three to 59 months in the Sahel Region of Sub-Saharan Africa. This intervention is approved by WHO for this age group for regions where malaria transmission is at a peak during a period of no more than four months, and where the available drugs (sulphadoxine pyrimethamine plus amodiaquine - SPAQ) are still effective. The total eligible group for this intervention is now about 32 million children. In this reporting period, partly funded by Global Fund and DFID, but mainly by funds raised from philanthropists, Malaria Consortium continued to deliver directly child-friendly, dispersible products across Nigeria, Chad, and Burkina Faso, expanding our reach to 6 million children in the 2019 rainy season, up from 4.12m in the prior year.

To engage in at-scale delivery of effective vector control interventions and develop, investigate, promote, and implement novel, vector-focused approaches that reduce disease transmission Malaria Consortium continues to be involved in distribution of long-lasting insecticidal nets (LLINs), which remains one of the key, high-value interventions against malaria. In this reporting year, we distributed fewer nets directly as the countries/states we serve were not programmed for campaign-based distribution. In Uganda, we finalised the second universal net distribution for the country, with a balance of eight million nets, and continued to monitor their durability and compare this with the performance of a new kind of net, with an adjuvant chemical to enhance the effectiveness of the pyrethroid insecticide. Results are pending.

We are implementing an integrated vector management programme for dengue control in Cambodia and extended our work with mobile and migrant populations in forested areas, where most of the residual falciparum malaria is to be found, seeking to accelerate the progress towards elimination.

Malaria Consortium hosted and provided technical support through both the Vector Control Working Group and the Surveillance Working Group of the Asia Pacific Malaria Elimination Network (APMEN). This is based out of our regional office in Thailand, working together with all the countries of the Asia Pacific Leaders’ Malaria Alliance (APLMA) to assure and push forward the most appropriate technical interventions in the region. We have also provided technical assistance on appropriate vector control and insecticide resistance management strategies in Malawi and Kenya by helping them to develop their national and typically five-year strategic plans as part of the USAID funded PMI VectorLink programme. In the same programme, we will be supporting Burkina Faso and Ethiopia over the coming months to develop their resistance management plans.

To improve access to, and the quality of, services for the diagnosis and treatment of diseases and/or those that enhance child and maternal health This objective is targeted at improving access to and quality in diagnosis and treatment at all levels of the health system. Overall, more than 15 million patients accessed quality assured treatment for malaria, diarrhoea, and pneumonia with Malaria Consortium support.

In the field of diagnosis, major steps continue to be taken in the widespread use of rapid diagnostic tests and acceptance that there should always be parasitological diagnosis of malaria prior to treatment is built into most countries’ protocols. While progress has been made, there is more to do to assure that protocols are followed, in terms of both quality supply and consistent clinician behaviour.

There has been further progress on the field evaluation of tools for the diagnosis of pneumonia. Malaria Consortium has continued analysis of several electronic devices in Ethiopia and Nepal. We also completed research in Nigeria on identifying severe pneumonia in the community linked to the clinical sign of ‘chest in-drawing’.

Integrated community case management (iCCM) of malaria, pneumonia, and diarrhoea remains a key approach to management of the common childhood diseases in Southeast Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa. This is also linked, where possible, to community assessment of malnutrition and access to therapeutic feeding, directly or indirectly (iCCM+). We now have experience of iCCM in Mozambique, Uganda, Nigeria, South Sudan, and Myanmar. In each country, the roles of community health workers differ and combination funding is required as Global Fund can only provide commodities associated with malaria in this context. In Nigeria, we are working with Niger state government to develop a comprehensive community-based primary health care programme which also includes iCCM involving the recently created cadre of CHIPS.

To improve health system effectiveness and efficiency, through enhanced surveillance, outbreak response, referral, reporting, and capacity and market development Malaria Consortium has traditionally used malaria as our access point and leveraged this to support wider aspects of service delivery such as community delivery, clinical capacity building, supervision, laboratory services, antenatal care, child and maternal health, and data capture and analysis. We continue to develop the offering in the move to community-based primary healthcare as part of the overall move to Universal Health Coverage (UHC).

As the burden of malaria decreases and the focus moves towards elimination, including sub-national elimination, new tools and techniques are being put in place. Surveillance and response is key along the continuum towards elimination, shifting from an aggregate approach to a case-based one. Technology is increasingly playing a part in data capture and sharing, and in the support and supervision of remote and community workers. Linkages are also being made to wider interventions in child and maternal health. In Mozambique, we have expanded a programme of technology-facilitated support to, and supervision of, community health workers for child and maternal health from the pilot area in Inhambane into Cabo Delgado and Zambezia having been adopted as the national solution, providing community-level, case data directly into the national health management information system. A greater focus is being made across countries to support data visualisation and data use for decision-making and these components are being embedded both at project and NMCP levels where possible.

In Uganda, we have the privilege of serving 95% of the districts. We are the lead agency on the USAID Malaria Action Program for Districts, and through the DFID-funded ‘Strengthening Uganda’s Response to Malaria (SURMa) we are working across the country to bring stratified malaria interventions to both community and facility-based services, across both public and private sectors.

Financial Review: Income: Total income received during the year amounted to £71 million, an increase of £16 million (29%) on the previous year. The increase in income was primarily due a £13.3 million increase (47%) in SMC funding. Funding received for SMC during the year at £42.6 million (2019: £28.9 million) was 60% (2019: 53%) of total income received for the year. We continue to receive significant philanthropic funding for SMC. £67.6 million (2019: £41.46 million) currently held as restricted SMC reserves is sufficient to fund 88% of the SMC programme until 2022. Funding from DFID for the year at £4.8 million (2019: £2 million) increased significantly due to the implementation of SuNMaP2 in Nigeria. Funds received from the US government agency, USAID, directly and via sub-agreements including Pathfinder and Abt Associates at £6.2 million (2019: £8 million) contributed to 9% of total income. The decrease in income received from USAID was primarily due to a reduction of £2.2 million in funds released by the agency for the Malaria Action Program for Districts, Uganda. There was a welcome increase in funding from Global Fund (2020: £5.5 million, 2019: £3.6 million) due to the continuation of malaria activities in Nigeria. Please refer to note 2c for the full list of our funding partners.

Expenditure: Charitable expenditure on programmes increased by £7.8 million (£44.1 million in 2019-20; £36.4 million in 2018-19). Note 3 on page 21 shows this expenditure categorised according to our five strategic objectives. Preventive Treatment and Health Systems are our two biggest areas of work representing 42% and 23% respectively of the total programme expenditure for the year; 33% of expenditure occurred in Nigeria and a further 20% in Uganda. Multi-country expenditure in Africa relates to the procurement of commodities for the SMC initiatives. Support costs as a proportion of direct costs are 12% as in the previous year. In carrying out its programmes, Malaria Consortium works with a number of partners to which it sub-contracts its work. Total sub-contract expenditure during the year was £5.6 million, as compared to £3.7 million in the prior year, most of which was for Seasonal Malaria Chemoprevention (SMC).

Result for the year: The total net movement in funds for the year was an increase of £26.84 million (2019: £18.58 million). The increase in funds in the year principally reflects timing differences associated with the £25.9 million donation from the Good Ventures for SMC: the funds received in February 2020 can only be utilised from July 2020 given the seasonal nature of the activity for which they are to be used. At the end of the year, restricted funds for ongoing projects were £67.6 million, reflecting the SMC donations, whilst unrestricted funds were £5.07 million.

The main movement in the balance sheet was an increase in creditors of £4.1m due to funds received in advance from Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and Catholic Relief Services, which will be utilised in the next financial year. Cash received for SMC activities of £39.8m during the financial year is not a deferred creditor.

Reserves Policy: The Board of Trustees recognise the importance of building and maintaining unrestricted reserves at an appropriate level and entrust the Finance, Audit and Risk Committee to annually assess the charity’s level of unrestricted funds. The majority of the organisation’s operational commitments relate to activities funded by restricted funds. The contractual agreements cover the completion of such tasks and related financial commitments. The Finance, Audit and Risk committee reviewed future needs, opportunities, commitments, or risks, the likelihood of future income falling short of the amount of the anticipated costs and considered the level reserves that are necessary to make up the shortfall.

Malaria Consortium’s reserve policy is “to hold £3.6m of reserves, in order to cover existing commitments relating to staff and operational leases of £2.04m and four months of support costs to maintain the organisation’s shape in the event of timing differences in funding.”

General Reserves (Unrestricted): General reserves are reserves that are not restricted to or designated for a particular purpose. Based on the current reserves policy, the minimum level of reserves are set at £3.6m as this is considered sufficient to meet existing contractual commitments of £2.04m and the support costs for four months. In addition, the Board of Trustees decided it was prudent and necessary to set aside a designated reserve of £1.3m from unrestricted reserves. Total unrestricted reserves as at 31 March 2020 were £5.07m (2019: £4.29m) of which £3.75 million (2019: £3.16m) were free reserves and £1.3 million (2019: £1.126m) were designated reserves. £1.3m has been designated by the Board as below: Designated Funds 31st March 2020 31st March 2019 £000s £000s Foreign Exchange Movements 1,050 525 Programme Needs 0 250 Co-financing requirement 78 0 Research 80 103 Sylvia Meek Scholarship 63 74 Learning & Development 44 174 Total 1,315 1,126

Investment Policy and Performance: Funds received during the year for seasonal activities are invested in long-term interest-bearing notice accounts. Funds received for ongoing charitable activities and reserves are held in interest-bearing accounts that can be called on without notice. Monies are held in the most likely currency of expenditure in order to manage foreign exchange risk. The charity does not speculate on currency.

Disclosure of information to auditors: The trustees who held office at the date of approval of the Trustees’ Annual Report confirm that, so far as they are aware, there is no relevant audit information of which the company’s auditors are unaware, and each trustee has taken all the steps they ought to take to make themselves aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the company’s auditors are aware of that information.

Auditors: KPMG LLP were appointed as auditors by the Board of Trustees on 22 November 2012. Pursuant to section 487 of the Companies Act 2006, the auditors will be deemed to be reappointed and KPMG LLP will therefore continue in office.

Plans for Future Periods: Malaria Consortium will continue to have a primary focus on malaria whilst expanding our portfolio in our identified business areas. Due to the unprecedented circumstances of the COVID-19 pandemic, the focus of the next 12 months will be the delivery of current programmes adapted for as safe as possible implementation. This is to help host governments avoid trade-offs being made between the infectious diseases that impact the beneficiaries we serve. At the same time, we will aim to build further on the positive engagement of the wider philanthropic community, and expand the portfolio of funders we work with to combat our traditional target diseases and understand better, and overcome, the spread and effects of the current pandemic. Key donors remain very supportive and, though there will undoubtedly be some unavoidable slowing of our programming over the coming months, we believe that the largest proportion of our planned implementation and implementation research activities will continue. In particular, we will: 1. Further expand our reach on seasonal malaria chemoprevention (SMC) across the Sahel, and research/test launch implementation in newly eligible geographies for SMC outside the Sahel. 2. Continue to promote the distribution and use of Long-lasting Insecticide Treated Nets (LLINs) in appropriate settings, both through campaigns and continuous distribution models, stratified for epidemiological and entomological changes, and where outbreaks occur due to pandemic-induced delays in the delivery of preventive measures. 3. Help countries we serve to describe and action their plans for maintaining services through and beyond the pandemic and towards Universal Health Coverage, increasing access to high quality differential diagnostics and treatments through community-based primary health care and COVID-19 referral centres. 4. Explore avenues for health system improvement through surveillance models, data capture and use for decision-making, technology, and digital learning. Malaria Consortium has postponed the launch of a revised strategy until after the primary wave of the COVID-19 pandemic, when teams are able to refocus on medium to longer term considerations.

Principal Risks and Uncertainties: The responsibility for overseeing the management of risk has been delegated by the trustees to the Finance, Audit and Risk Committee (FARC) that reports to the Board. The FARC reviews the Risk Register quarterly, which shows the impact and likelihood of the major risks, and Risk Assessment and Risk Management processes.

Risk Assessment: The achievement of our objectives depends on many factors, both inside and outside the control of the organisation. The identified risks, and our approach to their management, include: 1. Strategic: More competition due to other organisations expanding into areas of Malaria Consortium’s interest resulting in reduced funding opportunities. There is much increased competition for resources driven by political pressure on international aid budgets, proposals for funding becoming less linked to specific diseases and an increased interest from multi-sectoral organisations. To mitigate this, Malaria Consortium works with a wide combination of international partners, is building experience of working across additional disease conditions and interventions in the communities at risk of malaria, and is constantly tracking the balance of the portfolio of research and implementation programmes. 2. Governance: Failure to ensure proper corporate governance from a lack of appropriately skilled trustees leading to poor reputation. The trustees acknowledge the importance of reflecting the diversity of its stakeholders and areas of work amongst themselves. We have established clear plans, based on a diversity and skills matrix, for further promoting diversity. Furthermore, in light of recent revelations elsewhere in the charity sector, the trustees have reviewed Malaria Consortium’s Code of Conduct and all key policies and guidelines linked to safeguarding beneficiaries and employees and are reassured that appropriate safeguards are in place. 3. Performance: A failure to deliver a project through internal and external factors, resulting in a loss of reputation. To gain funding in an increasingly competitive sector, the organisation needs to demonstrate consistently to funders our ability to deliver. The programmatic achievements of the organisation remain impressive, with repeated and increased funding from donors. In addition, the organisation has increased its accountability, transparency, and assurance to demonstrate good value for money to donors and strengthen our safeguarding approach. Operational calls between senior management in the head office and in the regional offices continue to review performance and expenditure on a monthly basis and a quarterly performance review is shared with the Board. 4. Operational: A failure to safeguard staff adequately particularly in high-risk areas resulting in a serious incident. The greatest need for our services is often in areas with high, and changing, security threats, particularly in South Sudan, Northern Nigeria, Northern Mozambique, and parts of Myanmar. Security of beneficiaries, personnel, and property is paramount. We keep up-to-date information about the security situations where we work, and have suitable insurance to cover our work and staff. If security threats are persistent, we relocate, and/or suspend operations. No relocations/suspensions were required in the reporting period.

Independent auditor’s report to the members of Malaria Consortium: Opinion: We have audited the financial statements of Malaria Consortium (“the charitable company”) for the year ended 31 March 2020 which comprise the group and charity Statement of Financial Activities, the group and charity balance sheet, the Group Cash Flow Statement and related notes, including the accounting policies in note 1. In our opinion the financial statements: give a true and fair view of the state of the group’s and charitable company’s affairs as at 31 March 2020 and of groups incoming resources and application of resources, including its income and expenditure, for the year then ended; have been properly prepared in accordance with UK accounting standards, including FRS 102 The Financial Reporting Standard applicable in the UK and Republic of Ireland; and have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006. Basis for opinion: We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing (UK) (“ISAs (UK)”) and applicable law. Our responsibilities are described below. We have fulfilled our ethical responsibilities under, and are independent of the group in accordance with, UK ethical requirements including the FRC Ethical Standard. We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is a sufficient and appropriate basis for our opinion. Going concern: The trustees have prepared the financial statements on the going concern basis as they do not intend to liquidate the group or the charitable company or to cease its operations, and as they have concluded that the group and charitable company’s financial position means that this is realistic. They have also concluded that there are no material uncertainties that could have cast significant doubt over its ability to continue as a going concern for at least a year from the date of approval of the financial statements (“the going concern period”). We are required to report to you if we have concluded that the use of the going concern basis of accounting is inappropriate or there is an undisclosed material uncertainty that may cast significant doubt over the use of that basis for a period of at least a year from the date of approval of the financial statements. In our evaluation of the trustees’ conclusions, we considered the inherent risks to the group’s business model and analysed how those risks might affect the group and charitable company’s financial resources or ability to continue operations over the going concern period. We have nothing to report in these respects. However, as we cannot predict all future events or conditions and as subsequent events may result in outcomes that are inconsistent with judgements that were reasonable at the time they were made, the absence of reference to a material uncertainty in this auditor's report is not a guarantee that the group or the charitable company will continue in operation. Other information: The trustees are responsible for the strategic report and Trustees’ report. Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover those reports and, accordingly, we do not express an audit opinion or, except as explicitly stated below, any form of assurance conclusion thereon. Our responsibility is to read the other information and, in doing so, consider whether, based on our financial statements audit work, the information therein is materially misstated or inconsistent with the financial statements or our audit knowledge. Based solely on that work: we have not identified material misstatements in the other information; in our opinion the information given in those reports for the financial year is consistent with the financial statements; and in our opinion those reports have been prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006. Matters on which we are required to report by exception: Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if, in our opinion: the charitable company has not kept adequate accounting records or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us; or the charitable company financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns; or certain disclosures of trustees’ remuneration specified by law are not made; or we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit. We have nothing to report in these respects.

Trustees’ responsibilities: As explained more fully in their statement set out on page 14, the trustees (who are also the directors of the charitable company for the purposes of company law) are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view; such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error; assessing the group’s and charitable company’s ability to continue as a going concern, disclosing, as applicable, matters related to going concern; and using the going concern basis of accounting unless they either intend to liquidate the group or the charitable company or to cease operations, or have no realistic alternative but to do so.

Auditor’s responsibilities: Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue our opinion in an auditor’s report. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance, but does not guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs (UK) will always detect a material misstatement when it exists. Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if, individually or in aggregate, they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of the financial statements. A fuller description of our responsibilities is provided on the FRC’s website at www.frc.org.uk/auditorsresponsibilities.

The purpose of our audit work and to whom we owe our responsibilities: This report is made solely to the charitable company’s members, as a body, in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006. Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the charitable company’s members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditor’s report and for no other purpose. To the fullest extent permitted by law, we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the charitable company and its members as a body, for our audit work, for this report, or for the opinions we have formed.

Joanne Lees (Senior Statutory Auditor) for and on behalf of KPMG LLP, Statutory Auditor Chartered Accountants 15 Canada Square Canary Wharf London E14 5GL 15 January 2021
