**Conversation between Innovations for Poverty Action's Deworm the World, Good Ventures, and GiveWell, November 10, 2012**

**Participants:**

Deworm the World (DtW): Karen Levy, _Regional Director_ and other staff

Good Ventures: Cari Tuna, _President_

GiveWell: Elie Hassenfeld, _Co-Executive Director_; Eliza Scheffler, _Research Analyst_;

Stephanie Wykstra, _Research Analyst_

**Summary:**

GiveWell met with Deworm the World in Kenya to discuss the chronology of the organization, its role in the national deworming program, it's cascade system, DtW's relationship with government actors and process for institutionalizing deworming fully, as well as DtW's monitoring and evaluation. **Note:** This is a set of summary notes compiled by GiveWell in order to give an overview of the major points made by the DtW team and others in conversation. **Chronology of Deworm the World**

Researchers from Harvard evaluated a school-based deworming program undertaken by the Dutch NGO ICS in the late 1990s. The magnitude of the impacts of the program was large and subsequently received extensive scrutiny and publicity. The program seemed like a good candidate for scaling up, but academics were not well placed to do this. ICS did some deworming in schools, but were not well placed to engage at a large scale. Karen Levy was involved with this as the country director at Innovations for Poverty Action, which supports randomized control trials in Kenya. Michael Kremer, one of the principle investigators on the Kenya deworming study, and Esther Duflo, a founder of JPAL, were both Young Global Leaders at the World Economic Forum, where they sat on the education committee. In 2007, they lobbied the education committee to take on deworming, bringing a group of Young Global Leaders on board. Many of the members of Deworm the World's current board of directors (as of November 2012) had been Young Global Leaders on that committee. There was a lot of interest at this same time in developing a national school health policy in Kenya. This had World Bank support. Donors formed a collaborative body called the Kenya Education Subsector Support Program, which provided a 5 year funding envelope (2005-2009) for deworming, to be allocated through the Ministry of Education's budget. The body within the ministry of education that was in charge of implementing deworming was the School Health, Nutrition, and Meals unit. School feeding was a major priority for this team, accounting for millions of dollars of their budget and 3 of their 4-person staff. The unit's capacity was also constrained by a hiring freeze that was ongoing at the time. In part because of this situation, implementation of deworming, despite its allocated budget, remained a challenge. Strategizing about how to support the government to expand deworming in this context was an early task of what was then called Deworm the World (DtW) in Kenya. Existing prevalence maps allowed for targeting of the treatment program. Supporting multiple stakeholders (e.g., Ministry of Health, Ministry of Education, KeMRI, ESACIPC ) to strategize about how to overcome logistical challenges helped make the design of the program cost effective. Because of time constraints initially little attention was paid to monitoring. Because of budget constraints, DtW operated on what, in retrospect, was a shoestring budget. These resources were used to train the master trainers (see description of the cascade system). The staff consisted of three people (including Karen and Laban) and one intern. That year the Kenyan government dewormed 3.6 million children. Operations had a set back when there was a corruption scandal in the Ministry of Education right after the elections. It was discovered that money had been stolen in 2006 from pre-primary education budgets, and there were accusations of corruption in the deworming program. Donors pulled out of the education sector. To keep deworming going, DtW started looking for other sources of funding. The Ministry of Education supported the continuation of deworming but did not want to be in charge of the funding because of concern about corruption damaging it again. The Children's Investment Fund Foundation (CIFF) agreed in late 2011 to fund national government led school-based deworming in Kenya, so DtW hired a team, rented an office, and re-launched.

### Deworm the World's role in Kenya

DtW's relationship with the deworming program in Kenya is different than in India, primarily because there is relatively less government funding for the program in Kenya. Programmatically, there are many similarities. The program has 60 government master trainers, 1000 district and division-level personnel, and 24,000 teachers administering the drugs. More than half of the deworming budget is administered through District Education Officers and District Medical Officers of Health. DtW acts as a fiscal agent for funds that are channeled to District Education Officers. This allows DtW to track how the money is spent and report to donors. DtW has helped the government create personalized budgets for each district, so that the appropriate amount of money can be allocated. DtW does not have to pay the salaries of master trainers or teachers, as they are government employees.

### The cascade system

The deworming program supported by DtW works in 21 counties with 111 districts. The next level after the district is the division, then zones, then schools. DtW supported the creation of a system to roll out the deworming program called the cascade, because it disseminates information down many levels, from master trainers to district level officials, to division level officials, to every teacher who administers the drugs. The sequence of events that happens in every district is the same, but the districts start the sequence in waves. 7-12 districts are launched at the same time and begin the cascade process, then the next group of districts begins, and so on. DtW works to help to optimize the use of master trainer time and set schedules with districts based on the districts' school calendars. At the national level are the Master Trainers - government officials who conduct the first round of trainings and ensure that they are executed according to guidelines. 3 Master Trainers are dispatched to each district, where they conduct 2.5 days of training for district and division-level staff. On the first day, 3 education and 3 health district officials are trained. On the second day, both the education and health teams bring 4 division-level staff per division to be trained. At that point the district officials become the trainers, and the national-level master trainers become the overseers. The district-level trainers lead the division teams through the same content that the district teams learned the day before. The third day is a half day, during which district and division-level staff plan how they are going to train all the teachers at the schools in their area, determine the schedule for the deworming program, and plan the deworming day operations. All children in a district are dewormed on a single day, determined by these staff. On deworming day, district and division-level people become overseers while the teachers are the implementers. By giving every district the tools with which to carry out its own program, the cascade system ensures that deworming will be done consistently across time and space, but will also be flexible to the district. DtW supports government efforts to provide guidance to district officials about how to use the forms that come out of planning to generate budgets for their deworming programs. The Kenya school-based deworming program uses a reverse cascade system to get the excess drugs and forms back. Forms are filled out by deworming implementers and overseers on every level, from the classroom to the district. The program currently aggregates data from the school-level forms as a way of checking the accuracy of the area and district-level forms (which are completed by division and district-level personnel). DtW and their government counterparts use a coverage validation process to find out if the numbers are off. The forms that come out of this system of trainings have generated a very comprehensive list of schools that exists in Kenya. The government has started using the deworming program's list for other purposes.

### Institutionalization and sustainability

No one wants to see a deworming program that deworms for 4-5 years, then stops because it wasn't sufficiently institutionalized. But institutionalization is complicated - and an ongoing challenge for DtW, the donors that support the program, and stakeholders that support it. Certainly, by supporting a government run program implemented by government employees, some of the challenge of institutionalization is addressed. A demonstrated track record of successful, regular implementation may also create momentum. Investing thoughtfully to make institutionalization successful is also important. One of the major challenges to full institutionalization is that this program is conducted across ministries. In order to make this work in its current program, DtW has supported efforts to create structures to bring these ministries together. The management team is composed of representatives from the Ministry of Public Health and Sanitation, and the Ministry of Education. The team at the next level is similarly composed. The Master Trainers are key to sustainability, because many of those people will have moved up in the Ministry at the end of the 5 years. Having 60 civil servants who are strongly invested in and committed to this program and really understand it is going to be very helpful in transitioning. It's the hope and aspiration of DtW, the donors that support the program, and its sponsors in government, that the lessons learned from this program will have huge benefits for the government, in terms of working across ministries, developing better accounting skills, and creating an infrastructure for nation-wide drug distribution plans.

### Future room for more funding

DtW doesn't know what the state of worm prevalence is going to look like after the current 5-year program. Eventually the goal is to eradicate worms as a public health problem in Kenya. The costs will also go down in the future because much of the current costs are for the designing of forms and management systems. Kenya is in the middle of a major decentralization of fiscal and administrative power. It is moving towards stronger county-level authority. Because worms tend to be regional, deworming is going to be necessary in some counties more than others.

### Monitoring and evaluation

Coverage monitoring is done through the reverse cascade, which gathers all completed forms from the schools and aggregates them at the district level, and also through attendance forms at the training sessions, which record how many schools were represented at the training sessions. Process monitoring and coverage validation (PMCV) is the process by which DtW and its partners monitor the process and quality of the program. Process monitoring is conducted by Fred [[last name]] and a team of field staff who work out of the IPA office in Kisumu. This team visits a random sample of regional training sessions and schools, which provides lots of data to monitor quality. The coverage validation piece is more complex, because the team needed to figure out a way to make a rigorous assessment of the accuracy of coverage forms. This is hard to assess because if the program had put someone in classrooms to directly observe drug administration, this process might be biased by the Hawthorne effect (behavior changes when aware of being observed). KeMRI has a separate contract with Cliff to do parasitology research on the prevalence and impact of worms in the regions where deworming occurs. Separation was judged to be important so as not to bias the way deworming is conducted, which could bias the results of the study. DtW and its government counterparts will know KeMRI's broad baselines for the beginning, middle, and end of the study. The samples are stratified by prevalence and intensity at baseline so that trends can be assessed at high, medium, and low intensities. KeMRI's study involves 200 schools. KeMRI is conducting a more intense study with 2 sets of approximately 60 schools each.

KeMRI is looking at certain outcome measures before and after each treatment round of deworming. This allows it to look at drug efficacy (if measured immediately before and after, it's possible to tell if the drugs are working. If measured 6 months after treatment, it would be harder to determine the reason for changes in health). When KeMRI officials go into schools they do not associate themselves in any way with the deworming program, so as to avoid causing higher adherence to the deworming drug administration than would otherwise have been the case. DtW believes that, in teachers' minds, the deworming program, and DtW in particular, and KeMRI are sufficiently not associated so that the results of the study will be externally valid. KeMRI's before-treatment team measures many health-related factors, and the after-treatment team does the same, without asking specific questions about deworming. There are still open questions about how to scale down deworming. There is a lot more evidence on Schistosomiasis declining, but with STH, there are 3 different species, each with different lengths of cycles and different reinfection rates. At this point, the baseline of the KeMRI study has been completed. Cliff has it, but the government has yet to announce the results. KeMRI's study certainly did find worm prevalence. The first set of before and after data has been collected, but DtW hasn't seen this yet.