We roughly estimated that 100 people were there when we arrived, and some people arrived or departed over the course of the event. It appeared that many people had come just to observe the event rather than to withdraw transfers. Mr. Skeates, the Uganda Field Director, made announcements at the start of the event, translated by the 2 community monitors. The announcements included reminders about how to keep account information secure (e.g., after entering your PIN number, make sure to press "send" before handing your phone back to the agent; make sure you have received a confirmation message after withdrawing and that it states the correct amount; count the cash immediately after receiving it.) After announcements, the three mobile money agents set up their stations - two were sitting on chairs under a large tree and the third was sitting in the MTN van with another person who we assumed was affiliated with MTN. One community monitor sat near the two agents under the tree and one stood near the van window. The community monitor by the tree appeared to mostly be observing transactions, while the one by the van was playing more of an intermediary role. We saw many people with small purses or wallets to hold their money, and some who carried it by hand. Mr. Skeates noted that far fewer people were withdrawing cash at this cash out day than he had expected. In total, we estimated that about 40 people withdrew cash at the event, while 380 people across two villages had received transfers. Mr. Skeates asked an English-speaking village member about this, who said that many people traveled to an adjacent district to withdraw cash from an MTN agent there, because the big market day in their area is on Monday, and the cash out day was happening on a Tuesday. After withdrawals had started, it was announced that anyone who was unable to withdraw cash should gather at a certain location. Names and GD identification numbers of these people were collected. Mr. Skeates then had an English-speaking village member read him a name and GD identification number while he looked the person up in a database on his lap top. At first, Mr. Skeates called each person over individually, asked her or him a few questions, and explained what he knew about the reason they were unable to withdraw cash. Mr. Skeates was being translated by the English-speaking village member. After a few individual meetings, Mr. Skeates decided instead to look up all of the people at once and group them by type of issue, so that he could speak to each group of people at once. There were four types of issues that were responsible for most of the people who were unable to withdraw funds at the cash out day:

1. MTN (the payment provider) had not yet activated the funds in the person's account. Mr. Skeates said that this was not a common problem in the previous campaign in Uganda, but it affected many people at this cash out day. He estimated that people affected by this issue would receive their first installment of funds in another 2-3 weeks.
2. The person was registered under a different name with MTN than she or he had registered with GiveDirectly. This was a fairly common issue. Mr. Skeates said that it affected 93 out of the 1824 people currently enrolled in this campaign.
3. The person was not yet officially enrolled to receive transfers because GiveDirectly still needed to make a final visit to her or his household as part of the enrollment process.
4. The person was not enrolled to receive transfers because she or he had been found to be ineligible.

As we were leaving, Mr. Skeates told us that a representative of the mobile money company (MTN) was coming to the village to help recipients with registration issues. _All GiveWell conversations are available at http://www.givewell.org/conversations_