This chlorine dispenser was installed opposite the small set of stairs leading down to the water collection point, which meant that in order to add chlorine to a container, the person collecting water would have to first step across the protected spring, and then lift the container up to the level of the dispenser. We asked why the dispenser was placed in this position rather than in a place that people would be able to access it more easily, but there was not a clear reason. DSW explained that this was one of their earlier pilots, and clearer placement instructions for dispenser installation staff had been put in place since then. DSW also explained that people are instructed to add chlorine to their containers first so as to avoid having to lift 20 liters of water while standing across the spring. [See GiveWell's photos: https://picasaweb.google.com/109427789386001570492/DispensersForSafeWaterSiteVisit?authkey=Gv1sRgCKmT_tPy8uf3Ow]. Community members told us that they came to draw water for washing every day, and to get drinking water every 2-3 days. They said they used different containers for washing and drinking water. We spent less time at the second chlorine dispenser location. People in this area were collecting water from multiple points along an above ground stream, as well as from a protected spring. The dispenser was placed several yards (at least 4) away from any of these collection points, and appeared to be removed from where most people were gathered. DSW staff told us that they considered this to be a poorly designed dispenser installation, and improved placement guidelines after this dispenser was installed. A GiveWell staff member watched the people collecting water, and saw one man using the dispenser in several containers before filling them. It wasn't possible to get a clear count of how many people were filling water during the short time we watched the second dispenser.