These are not the same criteria used in Uganda, which still uses the old targeting criteria. The new criteria took into account feedback from focus groups (e.g., feedback about the importance of widows as a particularly vulnerable group), which were conducted before the criteria were fully tested. GiveDirectly is not soliciting any explicit feedback on the fairness of the new criteria, and so far has not heard of any issues with fairness in targeting. GiveDirectly has found a poverty rate in Homa Bay similar to that of Siaya and Rarieda. However, more people in Homa Bay have metal roofs than in Siaya. This is likely because the grass for thatched roofs does not grow in Homa Bay, so the price of thatch is less competitive. This may mean that Homa Bay residents spend a higher percentage of their income on housing.

#### Return on investment (ROI) in Homa Bay

Because Homa Bay residents are less likely to spend their cash transfers on roofs, the ROI from these transfers may differ from that seen in Siaya. However, GiveDirectly is generally not focused on ROI. Its first randomized controlled trial measured a wide range of indicators (including mental health, education, child nutrition, and income), and it has not closely examined ROI. Studies of the Homa Bay program, such as the Aspirations study, will collect basic consumption data, which GiveDirectly will eventually be able to use. However, Ms. Toth is not sure whether the Aspirations study will include a specific measure of ROI. Because Homa Bay is very similar to Siaya geographically, GiveDirectly is not concerned that its level of impact in Homa Bay will be lower. _All GiveWell conversations are available at http://www.givewell.org/conversations_